From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> You get benefits on the first, yeah?
Yeah. And what happened today? Um, they
just didn't load.
Says that they will arrive, but they
will be late.
The Trump administration has agreed to
restore some of the funding for the food
program known as SNAP.
But there's still uncertainty
>> [music]
>> about how much money will come through
and when. What would that normally look
like today? Um, it would be like 780.
Is there an account balance?
Um, I have 12 cents.
Tens of millions of Americans, one in
[music] eight, rely on SNAP. Without
federal assistance, many people do not
know how they will provide for
themselves or their families. I adopted
my grandson, he's two.
And it's terrifying thinking I can't
feed him.
Now that that's been frozen, I literally
have nothing in the house. It's It's not
everybody's fault that Congress can't
make a decision on a bill.
So they shouldn't punish the low-income
family,
the needy people,
because that's what we rely on.
>> [music]
>> Today,
we hear from people in one of the
communities most reliant on food aid.
>> [music]
>> And from my colleague Tony Rom about the
ongoing fight over SNAP as the
government enters its second month of a
shutdown.
>> [music]
>> It's Tuesday, November 4th.
Are we getting going?
It looks like we're going to start
rolling now.
Red truck is one.
One. Last Friday, Daily producers Olivia
Nat and Anna Foley went to Kermit, West
Virginia, a rural town of about 300
people. How about paying me? Apples and
meat, same thing. One per family, up to
two families per car.
There was a mobile food pantry set up
outside a Baptist church. Volunteers
loaded items including eggs, potatoes,
plums, and cucumbers into people's cars.
>> Got bread here for you, honey. Honey,
that's good.
You're Thank you. West Virginia is one
of the top recipients of SNAP benefits
in the country.
About 16% of West Virginians get food
assistance through SNAP. And even with
the extra help, a lot of people rely on
food pantries, especially at the end of
the month, and especially this month
when there hasn't been much clarity
about whether benefits were coming or
not.
Hi there.
My name's Olivia. I'm with The New York
Times and I was
>> Olivia and Anna spoke to people
about what they were planning to do
next.
some kind of news or something?
>> I am, yeah.
>> Okay. Do you all want to talk?
>> [laughter]
>> you're right. Mac. My name's Anna. Um,
so could you start by telling me your
name and, you know, where you're from,
how long you've lived here, a little bit
about yourself?
My name's Roy Messer
and I'm from Kermit, West Virginia. My
name's Teresa Hodge. I live here on
Stone Coal. Right down the hall. My name
is Breanna Lockhart.
I was a stay-at-home mom for a while,
but just recently went back to work
because of the shutdown that's going on.
>> [music]
>> And um, what brings you guys out here
today? [music]
Well, right now times are rough.
I mean, they took the food stamps, so
you got to do what you got to do, feed
your family. I'm picking up for me and I
brought my cousin with me so she can
Get meat.
Get [snorts] some meat. Yeah, that's
what they said. It was supposed to be
meat and some food.
>> I've seen the list and they have turkey
and eggs.
>> That'll work. At least I'll be able to
have something for Thanksgiving.
What can a box of food do? Like what is
the impact for your family? Well, that's
going to be able to effectively feed my
family for an extra week. You know,
we're going to be in a struggle to make
sure that it's either going to be food
or bills because even though my wife
works full-time, we still depend on SNAP
benefits to help get us through buying
the extra [music] meat and stuff like
that. Since there'll be no stamps, this
food bank will be the only
food I have to go in [music] my house.
How much money do you receive if you
don't mind me asking? SNAP, 136.
I think it's like 292.
I get a whole $63.
How far does $63 go for you? Two bags.
And you might get a box of crackers,
maybe. You know,
even with your food stamps, usually
about two weeks before the
month comes back up, you're scheming
tight. You run to food banks trying to
get help, you know. Just plain and
simple. Can you describe like what a
dinner would look like like with your
SNAP benefits and then if you can
imagine, you know, if you don't have the
SNAP benefits, what a dinner looks like
in that situation, [music] too?
Oh, with the SNAP benefits, we don't
have a good Southern meal like fried
chicken and green beans, mashed
potatoes, all the good stuff, rolls, all
that. But without, it's more like hot
dogs and
ramen noodles and stuff like that. And
that's just not healthy. It's really
not.
When did you find out that you probably
weren't going to be receiving benefits
for November?
>> About two weeks ago. When the government
got shut down, we kind of had an idea
that, you know, like if people aren't
going to get paid their their salaries,
then
government assistance is going to be the
last thing they're worried about.
>> [music]
>> And, you know, when that realization
kind of struck you, how did that make
you feel?
It made me feel less important to my
lawmakers than what I used to feel. It's
like I served our country in the Navy
and it's like I feel like my family as
veterans doubly gets looked [music] down
upon because we just get cast aside.
We're angry.
We're angry. Because, you know, we do
count.
To be honest, I have a lot of hatred.
Like and Trump was one of those that I
was all for, but now I feel like he's
more about the money and helping the
rich and like not caring about the
people that really do need help.
The Democrats down there is
they don't need to be getting their
payday, but they're all rich people, so
it don't, you know, it don't hurt. Their
kids and grandkids ain't going to go
hungry. You know what I mean?
>> [music]
>> What are your plans for making ends meet
this month? Hunting season's coming in,
so that helps out a lot.
You can't really depend on the
government really [music] for nothing,
so you got to
Eat more squirrel.
And deer.
>> [laughter]
>> If I had children, I'm going to tell you
something. I'm going to feed them
babies. Whatever it takes to do it, I'm
going to feed them.
You think people might get really
desperate? Yeah. They are now.
>> [music]
>> We're going to be against each other
over something as simple as a loaf of
bread
before it's over.
There's already people that have to
decide between food and their medicine.
Yeah.
Have you ever had to make a choice like
that?
Couple of times.
And it weren't for this food bank it
were about two months ago. If it weren't
for this food bank, me and my little
grandson would have starved for about 10
days.
We eat mashed potatoes and macaroni for
four days out of this food bank. And I
wouldn't have nothing to eat with that
little boy if I hadn't them.
And most of the time I didn't need it
all
cuz I'd make sure he had something.
I'm so sorry.
>> And yes, it's very upsetting. You can
understand that, right?
And [music] I think it's a sad state of
affairs when poor people that are not
able to work anymore, and I worked,
believe me, my whole life, can't even
get a way to eat.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Coming up, my colleague Tony Rom
explains the standoff in Washington
that's delayed [music] SNAP funding.
We'll be right back.
So Tony, we just heard from people that
our producers interviewed at a food
pantry in West Virginia and we heard a
lot of confusion and a lot of worry.
Could you explain what is going on with
SNAP funding right now?
SNAP is in a very difficult place and
the concerns that you're hearing out of
West Virginia are concerns that we're
hearing nationally as this shutdown now
lapses almost into its sixth week. SNAP
is a program that serves about 42
million people across the country and
even though it's a permanent fixture in
law, lawmakers have to put money into
that program every year. But because the
shutdown has gone on so long, SNAP has
exhausted its normal budget. And so
that's left this program at a bit of a
crossroads.
You've been following some legal
challenges to the administration's
position that it wouldn't or couldn't
release any SNAP funding. What is the
status of those challenges?
We've seen a number of cities and states
and nonprofits file lawsuits against the
Trump administration over the way that
it has handled SNAP during the
government shutdown. And this all
stemmed from a decision that the
administration made just a few weeks
ago. Initially, USDA said it was going
to tap a special set of emergency funds
to pay SNAP benefits if the shutdown
dragged into November. This is a pot of
money that was roughly about $5 or so as
of late October. That's supposed to be
used in instances where SNAP doesn't
have enough to cover benefits for
everybody. And that's a lot, but still
not enough to hit the roughly $8
or so that it needs every month to keep
those benefits flowing. But sort of
abruptly, the administration said it
wasn't going to use this money after
all. And that this huge fiscal financial
cliff that we were seeing for the
program as we entered November. And so
cities and states and religious groups
and others filed lawsuits against the
administration essentially to force the
release of funds. In [snorts] both
cases, federal judges have found serious
issues with the way that the Trump
administration has handled the SNAP
program. But only one of those courts,
at least so far, has ordered the
administration to spend that money. And
told the administration that it had
until Monday to essentially say how it
was going to do so. We finally got that
information from the administration. And
the short of it is that the Trump
administration is just going to tap only
the small set of emergency funds that it
has for SNAP and not some of the other
money it has laying around across
government. And as a result of that,
it's going to make partial payments to
people, but those partial payments may
be perhaps half of what families are
expecting to see in the month of
November. And it's not even clear when
that money might reach the millions of
people who depend on SNAP. So while in
some ways it was a bit of a victory for
people who subscribe to this program,
it's a little unclear if it's actually
going to provide the kind of relief that
these families truly need.
Is there any precedent for any of this?
Has anything like this happened before?
No. No, we've we haven't seen anything
like this with the SNAP program. I mean,
there are fights around federal safety
net programs all the time, but you know,
both sides admitted while they were in
court that there had never really been
anything like this. Mhm.
So I can imagine that this is really
confusing to the 40 million people that
rely on this funding to feed themselves
or their families. Can you remind us who
are these folks? What does the money get
used for and how exactly does the
program work?
So SNAP is the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program and it's the largest
anti-hunger program that the federal
government offers. There are about 42
million or so people who receive
benefits under SNAP every single month,
which amounts to about one in eight
Americans. And these are people located
all over the country. They live in rural
and urban areas. They live in Democratic
and Republican-leaning communities. Many
of them are children. Some of them are
veterans. They're seniors. It's a pretty
wide swath of the population that relies
on this critical federal safety net
program. But there are some restrictions
to it. Generally speaking, to get on
SNAP, you have to make or earn an amount
of money near the poverty line. For
people who qualify, the average benefit
per person is about $187
a month, which is critical to helping
these people buy groceries, but doesn't
go all the way in meeting all of their
nutrition needs. And so that's why SNAP
is part of this bigger picture of food
pantries and other services that help
address the issue of hunger here in the
United States. And in short, the way it
works is that the federal government
approves money for SNAP and eventually
that money makes its way to states and
on to benefit cards that millions of
Americans use.
How did SNAP end up in the crosshairs of
the administration to begin with?
SNAP has been in the crosshairs of
Republicans for some time now. It even
predates this administration because
there's a belief among Republicans that
many of the people who receive those
benefits don't actually need them or
don't deserve them. And so we've seen a
number of instances in which Republicans
have led efforts to restrict who can be
part of SNAP and the kinds of benefits
that people can receive. And we saw this
most recently in the context of the
debate around the president's tax
package where one of the ways
Republicans offset the massive costs of
that bill was to cut SNAP, to impose new
work requirements on recipients, which
helped save Washington some money, but
also created a situation in which
millions of people may lose access to
benefits as a result. And so in many
ways, what we're seeing right now is
that play out on a much larger scale.
Because while President Trump has been
willing to move around various pots of
money within the budget during the
shutdown to ease some of its impacts,
he's largely done that for programs that
he personally cares about or those that
may be essential to his political
agenda. But in others like SNAP, where
Republicans have long sought to cut,
this administration has not been as
generous and hasn't been as willing to
move money around. And indeed, that's
why this administration is only
providing partial payments. It's because
a court has told them to.
>> [snorts]
>> Basically, what you're saying is that
during the shutdown, the administration
has found ways, sometimes questionable,
sometimes temporary, but nevertheless
has found ways to pay for other things
it needs to fund, like the military for
example, other federal employees. So
this feels a little bit more deliberate
and I just sort of wonder what purpose
withholding SNAP serves politically.
In some ways, this is about political
retribution. If you rewind the clock
back a few weeks when President Trump
was asked about the shutdown and how he
was going to handle it, he said that he
was going to go after quote Democrat
programs. And President Trump at the
time didn't really explain what he
meant. He didn't identify anything
specific. But what we have seen since
the president made that threat is a very
deliberate effort across the
administration to cut funding streams
that they associate with members of the
political opposition. And even President
Trump sort of acknowledged this just a
few days ago when he said that the SNAP
program was one that largely benefited
Democrats, that most of the people on
the program were Democratic voters. We
know that that is not indeed the case.
But throughout all of this has just been
this very clear effort to go after areas
that Democrats like in a bid to pressure
them into coming to the negotiating
table.
How does this fit into sort of the
larger agenda of the Trump
administration vis-a-vis
cutting the government, shrinking the
government, cutting programs?
Yeah, in many ways this fight, this
crisis around SNAP is just a microcosm
of everything that President Trump has
been trying to do with federal spending
since he returned to office.
You know, on one hand, this is about
rethinking the size and the reach and
the role of government in Americans'
lives. And you can see that in the
programs that the president has looked
to cut. That's cuts to federal health
and education and science and research
and other programs. And the reality that
his budget for the 2026 fiscal year, if
Congress were to adopt it, would set
domestic spending at its lowest level in
modern history. But beyond that, the
other really dynamic facet of all of
this is that President Trump and his top
budget advisor, Russell Vought, have
gone to great lengths to recalibrate the
budget without the approval of Congress,
which has that power of the purse under
the Constitution. They have closed
entire agencies and laid off droves of
workers and halted billions of dollars
in federal spending enacted by Congress
without getting lawmaker support. And so
the SNAP program just really sits in the
middle of all that because it shows the
ways in which the president wants to
rethink those federal safety net
programs and the cuts that he aspires to
make, but also the ways he's willing to
use presidential power to achieve them.
So now that the administration has said
that it will comply with the court order
and find a way to fund the SNAP program,
at least partially, how quickly does
that mean that people who receive SNAP
benefits will actually see that money in
their accounts?
Yeah, that's the big question and in
short, we just don't know yet because
the Trump administration previously told
the court that by providing partial
payments, it could take potentially
weeks or maybe in some cases months
before the federal government and the
states could get these benefits out to
the millions of people who depend on
them. This could have been avoided
potentially if the government had chosen
to provide full payments and had tapped
other sources of money to backfill that
shortfall, but the Trump administration
opted not to do that. And as a result,
millions of people still find themselves
facing the same uncertainty today that
they did a few days ago about when that
next SNAP payment is going to arrive.
Which makes me wonder, just to go back
to West Virginia for a minute, a state
that Trump won handily in the last
election,
people are angry and people are
confused. They don't understand why
they're losing their benefits. And so it
sounds like the political calculation is
that this will ultimately benefit
Republicans more, especially in these
shutdown negotiations. But do you think
that that is correct? What is your
assessment of the political calculation
that's been done?
Yeah, I think they bet that A, it will
be the kind of thing that pressures
Democrats into negotiating. And B, that
absent that, the president can
accomplish what he proposed to do as
part of his 2026 budget even without
having Congress vote on it.
Whether that translates into a victory
in the eyes of the American people
remains to be seen. I think there have
been times where people have blamed the
administration for the cuts across
government and the ways that that's
affected their daily lives. But there's
also been times where I think people
just blame what's happening on just the
general mess of Washington. And the
result isn't that they see it as the
work of one party or another, but just
another chip away at their confidence in
the work of government. And so I think
that's in many ways one of the lasting
repercussions here. It's just another
instance where people look at Washington
and think this place isn't doing
anything for me and I can't count on it
for help when I'm in my greatest need.
>> [music]
>> And so in many ways it really just
distills how bad things have gotten here
in the nation's capital.
And the real people who might be hurt in
the process when the two parties can't
talk to each other.
>> [music]
>> Tony, thank you so much. Thanks for
having me.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Kimberly-Clark [music] will buy Kenvue,
the maker of Tylenol, for $40 billion. A
signal that the consumer products giant
is betting that the painkiller can
weather a barrage of attacks from
President Trump and his administration.
The president and others [music] have
made unproven claims that the use of
Tylenol and other acetaminophen products
during pregnancy [music]
can lead to autism.
And
President Trump weighed in on the race
for New York City mayor on the eve of
election day.
>> [music]
>> In a social media post, he endorsed
former Governor Andrew Cuomo in his
uphill battle to defeat Assemblyman
Zoran Mondani, the Democratic nominee.
>> [music]
>> And he vowed to limit federal funds
going to New York City if Mondani wins.
Today's episode [music] was reported and
produced by Olivia Nat and Anna Foley
with help from Mooj Zaidi.
It was edited by Patricia Willens with
help from Paige [music] Cowett and
fact-checked by Susan Lee.
Contains music by Marion Lozano and Dan
Powell and was engineered by Chris Wood.
Special thanks [music] to David
Fahrenthold, Rachel Culbertson, and the
Facing Hunger Food Bank.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.